OSDOCS#2429: documenting how updates work (#60091)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/update-mco-process.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="mco-update-process_{context}"]

> = Machine Config Operator node updates

Reviewer: @rioliu-rh could you please take a look at the mco update section? Thank you.

Reviewer 2: s/Machine Config Operator node updates/Understanding how the Machine Config Operator updates nodes
Currently, it sounds like we are updating the Machine Config Operator node.

> The Machine Config Operator (MCO) applies a new machine configuration to each control plane and compute node. During this process, the MCO performs the following sequential actions in the cluster:

Reviewer 3: another little nit: I ain't a grammar specialist in any way, but "During the process, MCO performs the following sequential actions" sounds a bit better than "During this process, **the** MCO performs **the** following sequential actions"   
same for "**The** CVO..." which here and there mid-sentence may be just "CVO" as well?

Reviewer 3: ain't a native speaker however, so take that with a grain of salt ;)

Author: I think in these cases, "MCO" and "CVO" need an article before them such as "the", and looking around the rest of the docs, it seems that this is generally how these Operators are referred to. I think one prominent exception would be something like OSUS, where it would sound somewhat awkward to say "the OSUS does x".

Reviewer 3: for consistency sake, and since its a definite bikeshedding from my side :) leaving this one up to you. however not in all but in some of the occasions of its use it does sound somewhat awkward, especially when a sentence is not talking about cvo itself, but about some other object, which being impacted by cvo somehow.

> The Machine Config Operator (MCO) applies a new machine configuration to each control plane and compute node. During this process, the MCO performs the following sequential actions in the cluster:

Reviewer 4: MCO will apply different machine configs for control plane nodes and worker nodes.

Reviewer 4: MCO will generated rendered config for all machine-config-pool separately. e.g `rendered-master-xx`, `rendered-worker-xx`, update process is same

> . Cordon and drain all of the nodes

Reviewer 3: should we mention one by one?  
also, a paused machine pool in EUS-to-EUS for example, is an exception.

Author: Could you clarify the exact order of operations here? Is it "Cordon and drain each node, one at a time, and _then_ update the OS of each node one at a time, and _then_ reboot one a time, etc."? Or is a single node cordoned, drained, updated, rebooted, uncordoned, and scheduled before the next node initiates the same process?

Reviewer 5: It's not one at a time, it's configurable for each pool (`.spec.maxUnavailable`). One is the default behavior. 

>  Or is a single node cordoned, drained, updated, rebooted, uncordoned, and scheduled before the next node initiates the same process?
^^^ this is the process when maxUnavailable is one

Reviewer 5: I think there's a card for MCO team to provide detailed documentation on their part of the upgrade

Author: I think linking to more fleshed out documentation about this specific part would be perfect for a page like this. In the meantime, I can try and rewrite this section to specify that this happens to one pool of cordoned nodes at a time and see if you guys think it looks good/accurate

Reviewer 6: > ...one pool of cordoned nodes at a time...

MachineConfigPools have [a `maxUnavailable` knob, defaulting to 1][1].  When the machine-config controller notices that a MachineConfigPool `spec` calls for an update, and fewer than `maxUnavailable` Nodes in that pool are unavailable, it will cordon that Node, [take some actions which may, but do not necessarily, include draining and/or rebooting][1], and uncordon the Node.  For OCP updates, there are almost always RHCOS updates getting rolled out, and those need the full drain and reboot.  But every once and a while we'll ship the same RHCOS and relevant MachineConfigs in two separate 4.y.z, and then you can have an OCP update that requires no drains or reboots.  Unclear to me how much of this context is worth including.  Personally, I'm fine with anything including:

* Don't even mention the machine-config operator.
* Mention that the machine-config operator exists, that it updates (unpaused) MachineConfigPools, and that that can take some time.
* Explaining that the time MachineConfigPools can take depends (almost always) on the time it takes to drain them, and also on the number of nodes you've ok'ed draining in parallel via `maxUnavailable`.
* Explaining how to figure out [which MachineConfigPool updates will trigger drains, and which will trigger reboots, and which will trigger neither][1].

But it's "up to `maxUnavailable` nodes from a MachineConfigPool" being cordoned at any given time, not the whole pool.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/5843b7a4b27f15bc3313ce8a41ef6de792081fcb/docs/MachineConfigDaemon.md#rebootless-updates

Reviewer 6: Ah, reading [your comment here][1] I now realize that your "one pool of cordoned nodes" means "up to maxUnavailable nodes from a MachineConfigPool".  I'd rather avoid the word "pool" for that, to keep folks from falling into the same misconception I did and assume that when you said "pool of ... nodes" you mean the whole MachineConfigPool.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/60091#discussion_r1211916951

Reviewer 3: agree with Trevor, the wording "pool" may mislead in this context. back to line 10 "Cordon and drain all of the nodes" we may rather remove the word "all"

Author: If there aren't any particular rewording suggestions, I can use "group" in place of "pool". I can also remove the word "all" to further avoid confusion.

Author: Also, I will save further refinement along the lines of Trevor's first comment for a second iteration of this doc.

. Update the operating system (OS) of each node

. Reboot the nodes

> . Uncordon the nodes

Reviewer 4: this section will make the user confuse, above steps: cordon/drain, os update, reboot, uncordon are the sequential actions performed on one node (rolling update).

Author: Could you clarify what the process looks like when the MCO updates a group of 3 nodes at a time? 

Does the MCO perform each step of that process for all three nodes before moving on to the next step? (for example, cordon/drain the three nodes, and then update the OS of the three nodes....).

Or does the process look entirely different?

Reviewer 5: Trevor describes it in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/60091#discussion_r1212387405 

TL;DR is that at most `maxUnavailable` nodes from a pool are in process. Steps between nodes are not coordinated, and as soon as one node is ready to receive workloads again, another may start the process.

Reviewer 4: by default, MCO will perform the rolling update one by one (`spec.maxUnavailable=1`) in different machine config pools. the actions on one node is like cordon > drain > update (config+os) > reboot > uncordon. it won't codorn all nodes at first. etc.

. Schedule workloads on the nodes

[NOTE]
====
When a node is cordoned, workloads cannot be scheduled to it.
====

> The time to complete this process depends on several factors including the node and infrastructure configuration. This process might take 5 or more minutes to complete per node.

Author: I think there is deeper context to this from when this content was first made for the "Understanding update duration" page. 

@LalatenduMohanty, @petr-muller, or @wking might know, but my memory/understanding is that it's intentionally omitted to communicate that: "This process may take a long time but there are too many variations and factors for us to guarantee a specific timeframe this would be completed by". I could be wrong though

> The time to complete this process depends on several factors including the node and infrastructure configuration. This process might take 5 or more minutes to complete per node.

Reviewer 5: It's very dependent on circumstances - user workloads specifically. Your understanding is correct, it's hard to guarantee. It is also possible to configure the workloads in a way that completely stucks the upgrade, unfortunately.

> The time to complete this process depends on several factors including the node and infrastructure configuration. This process might take 5 or more minutes to complete per node.

Reviewer 3: hmm.. then it make sense to omit since we cannot guarantee... (unless there's some high mark that we **can** actually consider as: ok it took way too much time at this point, its probably stuck and not just taking longer than ususal)

> The time to complete this process depends on several factors including the node and infrastructure configuration. This process might take 5 or more minutes to complete per node.

Reviewer 6: The machine-config operator will fire a `warning` [`MCDDrainError`][1] [after][2] [an hour][3].  But :shrug:, many workloads like the Prow CI jobs we run as CVO presubmits take multiple hours in unevictable, PodDisruptionBudget-protected pods, and that's normal too.  I would rather not get opinionated about how long "surprisingly long" is, and leave that up to the cluster administrator and workload administrators to negotiate between themselves.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/5843b7a4b27f15bc3313ce8a41ef6de792081fcb/install/0000_90_machine-config-operator_01_prometheus-rules.yaml#L20
[2]: https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/5843b7a4b27f15bc3313ce8a41ef6de792081fcb/pkg/controller/drain/drain_controller.go#L351
[3]: https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/5843b7a4b27f15bc3313ce8a41ef6de792081fcb/pkg/controller/drain/drain_controller.go#L70

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="mco-update-process_{context}"]
= Machine Config Operator node updates
The Machine Config Operator (MCO) applies a new machine configuration to each control plane and compute node. During this process, the MCO performs the following sequential actions in the cluster:

. Cordon and drain all of the nodes

. Update the operating system (OS) of each node

. Reboot the nodes

. Uncordon all of the nodes

> . Schedule workloads on the nodes

Author: There's a note right beneath this list that says: "When a node is cordoned, workloads cannot be scheduled to it."

I can drop this item from the list and add the following sentence in that same note: "Once a node is uncordoned, the scheduler schedules workloads on the node"

(it seems unfortunate to use the clunky wording of "scheduler schedules" but that seems to be the technically accurate description)

[NOTE]
====
When a node is cordoned, workloads cannot be scheduled to it.
====

> This process is repeated one pool of nodes at a time until each control plane and compute node is updated. The size of each pool is dependent on the value of `.spec.maxUnavailable`, which has a default value of one node.

Author: @evakhoni and @petr-muller here is the new content I wrote up to describe node pools. Feel free to leave any feedback. 

Specifically, perhaps we should also mention where this `.spec.maxUnavailable` configuration is located.

//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="mco-update-process_{context}"]
= Machine Config Operator node updates
The Machine Config Operator (MCO) applies a new machine configuration to each control plane and compute node. The `.spec.maxUnavailable` configuration, which has a default value of one node, determines how many nodes can simultaneously undergo the update process at any given time.

When the machine configuration update process begins, the MCO checks the amount of currently unavailable nodes in a pool. If there are fewer unavailable nodes than the value of `.spec.maxUnavailable`, the MCO will initiate the following sequence of actions on available nodes in the pool:

. Cordon and drain the node
+
[NOTE]
====
When a node is cordoned, workloads cannot be scheduled to it.
====

. Update the system configuration and operating system (OS) of the node

. Reboot the node

. Uncordon the node

A node undergoing this process is unavailable until it is uncordoned and workloads can be scheduled to it again. The MCO begins updating nodes until the number of unavailable nodes is equal to the value of `.spec.maxUnavailable`.

> As a node completes its update and becomes available, the number of unavailable nodes is once again fewer than `.spec.maxUnavailable`. If there are remaining nodes that need to be updated, the MCO initiates the update process on a node until the `.spec.maxUnavailable` limit is once again reached. This process repeats until each control plane and compute node has been updated.

Reviewer 4: I think for description of `spec.maxUnavailable` node, current description is not good. you can refer to the description provided by machine config pool definition.
```
oc explain machineconfigpool.spec.maxUnavailable
KIND:     MachineConfigPool
VERSION:  machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1

DESCRIPTION:
     maxUnavailable defines either an integer number or percentage of nodes in
     the corresponding pool that can go Unavailable during an update. This
     includes nodes Unavailable for any reason, including user initiated
     cordons, failing nodes, etc. The default value is 1. A value larger than 1
     will mean multiple nodes going unavailable during the update, which may
     affect your workload stress on the remaining nodes. You cannot set this
     value to 0 to stop updates (it will default back to 1); to stop updates,
     use the 'paused' property instead. Drain will respect Pod Disruption
     Budgets (PDBs) such as etcd quorum guards, even if maxUnavailable is
     greater than one.
```
We need to let the user know that `spec.maxUnavailable` is used to determine how many nodes in a mcp can be updated in parallel.
the cluster nodes will be updated separately in master and worker pool. the user can check update status via `oc get mcp`

> The following example workflow describes how this process might occur in a 5 node pool, where `.spec.maxUnavailable` is 3 and all nodes are initially available:

Reviewer 4: `node pool` is not accurate. it should be mcp(machine config pool). master or worker

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * updating/understanding_updates/how-updates-work.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="mco-update-process_{context}"]
= Machine Config Operator node updates

> The Machine Config Operator (MCO) applies a new machine configuration to each control plane and compute node. During this machine configuration update, control plane nodes and compute nodes are organized into their own machine config pools, where the pools of machines are updated in parallel to each other. The `.spec.maxUnavailable` configuration, which has a default value of one node, determines how many nodes in a machine config pool can simultaneously undergo the update process at any given time.

Reviewer 7: control plane and compute node > control plane node and compute node

So both instances do not gel into one noun string.

Reviewer 2: s/in parallel to each other/in parallel   
Currently, it seems redundant.

s/`.spec.maxUnavailable` configuration/`.spec.maxUnavailable` parameter or attribute 
(we really need a single term for these things!)

s/a default value of one node/a default value of `1`  
This is a real nit, as the parameter doesn't _really_ take _one node_ as a value.

s/at any given time/at the same time ??

> When the machine configuration update process begins, the MCO checks the amount of currently unavailable nodes in a pool. If there are fewer unavailable nodes than the value of `.spec.maxUnavailable`, the MCO will initiate the following sequence of actions on available nodes in the pool:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When the machine configuration update process begins, the MCO checks the amount of currently unavailable nodes in a pool. If there are fewer unavailable nodes than the value of `.spec.maxUnavailable`, the MCO initiates the following sequence of actions on available nodes in the pool:
```

As a node completes its update and becomes available, the number of unavailable nodes in the machine config pool is once again fewer than `.spec.maxUnavailable`. If there are remaining nodes that need to be updated, the MCO initiates the update process on a node until the `.spec.maxUnavailable` limit is once again reached. This process repeats until each control plane and compute node has been updated.

The following example workflow describes how this process might occur in a machine config pool with 5 nodes, where `.spec.maxUnavailable` is 3 and all nodes are initially available:

. The MCO cordons nodes 1, 2, and 3, and begins to drain them.

. Node 2 finishes draining, reboots, and becomes available again. The MCO cordons node 4 and begins draining it.

. Node 1 finishes draining, reboots, and becomes available again. The MCO cordons node 5 and begins draining it.

. Node 3 finishes draining, reboots, and becomes available again.

. Node 5 finishes draining, reboots, and becomes available again.

> . Node 4 finishes draining, reboots, and becomes available again.

Reviewer 2: I could be real picky here and ask why node 4 finishes draining after 5, despite that 4 started first.  

Or, why node 2 finishes before 1.
